A NOTE FOR EARLY RELEASE READERS
With Early Release ebooks, you get books in their earliest form—the
author’s raw and unedited content as they write—so you can take
advantage of these technologies long before the official release of these
titles.
This will be the 10th chapter of the final book. Please note that the
GitHub repo will be made active later on.
If you have comments about how we might improve the content and/or
examples in this book, or if you notice missing material within this
chapter, please reach out to the author at chip@huyenchip.com.
In Chapter 4 to Chapter 6, we discussed the logics for developing ML
systems. In Chapter 7 to Chapter 9, we discussed the considerations for
deploying, monitoring, and continually updating an ML system. Up until
now, we’ve assumed that ML practitioners have access to all the tools and
infrastructure they need to implement these logics and carry out these
considerations. However, that assumption is far from being true. Many data
scientists have told me that they know the right things to do for their ML
systems, but they can’t do them because their infrastructure isn’t set up in a
way that enables them to do so.
ML systems are complex. The more complex a system, the more it can
benefit from good infrastructure. Infrastructure, when set up right, can help
automate processes, reducing the need for specialized knowledge and
engineering time. This, in turn, can speed up the development and delivery
of ML applications, reduce the surface area for bugs, and enable new use
cases. When set up wrong, however, infrastructure is painful to use and
expensive to replace. In this chapter, we’ll discuss how to set up
infrastructure right for ML systems.
Before we dive in, it’s important to note that every company’s infrastructure
needs are different. The infrastructure required for you depends on the
number of applications you develop and how specialized the applications
are. At one end of the spectrum, you have companies that use ML for ad
hoc business analytics such as to project the number of new users they’ll
have next year to present at their quarterly planning meeting. These
companies probably won’t need to invest in any infrastructure—Jupyter
Notebooks, Python, and Pandas would be their best friends. If you have
only one simple ML use case, such as an Android app for object detection
to show your friends, you probably won’t need any infrastructure either—
you just need an Android-compatible ML framework like TensorFlow Lite.
1
At the other end of the spectrum, there are companies that work on
applications with unique requirements. For example, self-driving cars have
unique accuracy and latency requirements—the algorithm must be able to
respond within milliseconds and its accuracy must be near-perfect since a
wrong prediction can lead to serious accidents. Similarly, Google Search
has a unique scale requirement since most companies don’t process 63,000
search queries a second, which translates to 234 million search queries an
hour, like Google does. These companies will likely need to develop their
own highly specialized infrastructure. Google developed a large part of
their internal infrastructure for search; so did self-driving car companies
like Tesla and Waymo. It’s common that part of specialized infrastructure
is later made public and adopted by other companies. For example, Google
extended their internal cloud infrastructure to the public, resulting in
Google Cloud Platform.
2
In the middle of the spectrum are the majority of companies, those who use
ML for multiple common applications—a fraud detection model, a price
optimization model, a churn prediction model, a recommender system, etc.
—at reasonable scale. “Reasonable scale” refers to companies that work
with data in the order of gigabytes and terabytes, instead of petabytes, a
3
day. Their data science team might range from 10 to hundreds of
engineers. This category might include any company from a 20-person
startup to a company at Zillow’s scale, but not at FAAAM scale. For
example, back in 2018, Uber was adding tens of terabytes of data a day to
their data lake, and Zillow’s biggest dataset was bringing in 2 terabytes of
uncompressed data a day. In contrast, even back in 2014, Facebook was
generating 4 petabytes of data a day.
4
5
6
Companies in the middle of the spectrum will likely benefit from
generalized ML infrastructure that is being increasingly standardized (see
Figure 10-1). In this book, we’ll focus on the infrastructure for the vast
majority of ML applications at a reasonable scale.
Figure 10-1. Infrastructure requirements for companies at different production scales
7
In order to set up the right infrastructure for your needs, it’s important to
understand exactly what infrastructure means and what it consists of.
According to Wikipedia, in the physical world, “infrastructure is the set of
fundamental facilities and systems that support the sustainable functionality
of households and firms.” In the ML world, infrastructure is the set of
fundamental facilities that support the development and maintenance of ML
systems. What should be considered the “fundamental facilities” varies
greatly from company to company, as discussed earlier in this chapter. In
this section, we will examine the following four layers:
Storage and compute
The storage layer is where data is collected and stored. The compute
layer provides the compute needed to run your ML workloads such as
training a model, computing features, generating features, etc.
Resource management
Resource management comprises tools to schedule and orchestrate your
workloads to make the most out of your available compute resources.
Examples of tools in this category include Airflow, Kubeflow, and
Metaflow.
ML platform
This provides tools to aid the development of ML applications such as
model stores, feature stores, and monitoring tools. Examples of tools in
this category include SageMaker and MLflow.
Development environment
This is usually referred to as the dev environment; it is where code is
written and experiments are run. Code needs to be versioned and tested.
Experiments need to be tracked.
These four different layers are shown in Figure 10-2. Data and compute are
the essential resources needed for any ML project, and thus the storage and
compute layer forms the infrastructural foundation for any company that
wants to apply ML. This layer is also the most abstract to a data scientist.
We’ll discuss this layer first because they are the easiest to explain.
Figure 10-2. Different layers of infrastructure for ML
The dev environment is what data scientists have to interact with daily, and
therefore, it is the least abstract to them. We’ll discuss this category next,
then we’ll discuss resource management, a contentious topic among data
scientists—people are still debating whether a data scientist needs to know
about this layer or not. Because “ML platform” is a relatively new concept
with its different components still maturing, we’ll discuss this category last,
after we’ve familiarized ourselves with all other categories. An ML
platform requires up-front investment from a company, but if it’s done right,
it can make the life of data scientists across business use cases at that
company so much easier.
Even if two companies have the exact same infrastructure needs, their
resulting infrastructure might look different depending on their approaches
to build versus buy decisions—e.g., what they want to build in-house versus
what they want to outsource to other companies. We’ll discuss the build
versus buy decisions in the last part of this chapter, where we’ll also discuss
the hope for standardized and unified abstractions for ML infrastructure.
Let’s dive in!