Development Environment
The dev environment is where ML engineers write code, run experiments,
and interact with the production environment where champion models are
deployed and challenger models evaluated. The dev environment consists
of the following components: IDE (integrated development environment),
versioning, and CI/CD.
If you’re a data scientist or ML engineer who writes code daily, you’re
probably very familiar with all these tools and might wonder what there is
to say about them. In my experience, outside of a handful of tech
companies, the dev environment is severely underrated and underinvested
in at most companies. According to Ville Tuulos in his book Effective Data
Science Infrastructure, “you would be surprised to know how many
companies have well-tuned, scalable production infrastructure but the
question of how the code is developed, debugged, and tested in the first
place is solved in an ad-hoc manner.”
He suggested that “if you have time to set up only one piece of
infrastructure well, make it the development environment for data
scientists.” Because the dev environment is where engineers work,
improvements in the dev environment translate directly into improvements
in engineering productivity.
In this section, we’ll first cover different components of the dev
environment, then we’ll discuss the standardization of the dev environment
before we discuss how to bring your changes from the dev environment to
the production environment with containers.
Dev Environment Setup
The dev environment should be set up to contain all the tools that can make
it easier for engineers to do their job. It should also consist of tools for
versioning. As of this writing, companies use an ad hoc set of tools to
version their ML workflows, such as Git to version control code, DVC to
version data, Weights & Biases or Comet.ml to track experiments during
development, and MLflow to track artifacts of models when deploying
them. Claypot AI is working on a platform that can help you version and
track all your ML workflows in one place. Versioning is important for any
software engineering projects, but even more so for ML projects because of
both the sheer number of things you can change (code, parameters, the data
itself, etc.) and the need to keep track of prior runs to reproduce later on.
We’ve covered this in the section “Experiment Tracking and Versioning” in
Chapter 6.
The dev environment should also be set up with a CI/CD test suite to test
your code before pushing it to the staging or production environment.
Examples of tools to orchestrate your CI/CD test suite are GitHub Actions
and CircleCI. Because CI/CD is a software engineering concern, it’s beyond
the scope of this book.
In this section, we’ll focus on the place where engineers write code: the
IDE.
IDE
The IDE is the editor where you write your code. IDEs tend to support
multiple programming languages. IDEs can be native apps like VS Code or
Vim. IDEs can be browser-based, which means they run in browsers, such
as AWS Cloud9.
21
Many data scientists write code not just in IDEs but also in notebooks like
Jupyter Notebooks and Google Colab. Notebooks are more than just
places to write code. You can include arbitrary artifacts such as images,
plots, data in nice tabular formats, etc., which makes notebooks very useful
for exploratory data analysis and analyzing model training results.
Notebooks have a nice property: they are stateful—they can retain states
after runs. If your program fails halfway through, you can rerun from the
failed step instead of having to run the program from the beginning. This is
especially helpful when you have to deal with large datasets that might take
a long time to load. With notebooks, you only need to load your data once
—notebooks can retain this data in memory—instead of having to load it
each time you want to run your code. As shown in Figure 10-5, if your code
fails at step 4 in a notebook, you’ll only need to rerun step 4 instead of from
the beginning of your program.
Figure 10-5. In Jupyter Notebooks, if step 4 fails, you only need to run step 4 again, instead of having
to run steps 1 to 4 again
Note that this statefulness can be a double-edged sword, as it allows you to
execute your cells not in order. For example, in a normal script, cell 4 must
run after cell 3 and cell 3 must run after cell 2. However, in notebooks, you
can run cell 2, 3, then 4 or cell 4, 3, then 2. This makes notebook
reproducibility harder unless your notebook comes with an instruction on
the order in which to run your cells. This difficulty is captured in a joke by
Chris Albon (see Figure 10-6).
Figure 10-6. Notebooks’ statefulness allows you to execute cells not in order, making it hard to
reproduce a notebook
Because notebooks are so useful for data exploration and experiments,
notebooks have become an indispensable tool for data scientists and ML.
Some companies have made notebooks the center of their data science
infrastructure. In their seminar article, “Beyond Interactive: Notebook
Innovation at Netflix,” Netflix included a list of infrastructure tools that can
be used to make notebooks even more powerful. The list includes:
22
Papermill
For spawning multiple notebooks with different parameter sets—such as
when you want to run different experiments with different sets of
parameters and execute them concurrently. It can also help summarize
metrics from a collection of notebooks.
Commuter
A notebook hub for viewing, finding, and sharing notebooks within an
organization.
Another interesting project aimed at improving the notebook experience is
nbdev, a library on top of Jupyter Notebooks that encourages you to write
documentation and tests in the same place.
Standardizing Dev Environments
The first thing about the dev environment is that it should be standardized,
if not company-wide, then at least team-wide. We’ll go over a story to
understand what it means to have the dev environment standardized and
why that is needed.
In the early days of our startup, we each worked from our own computer.
We had a bash file that a new team member could run to create a new
virtual environment—in our case, we use conda for virtual environments—
and install the required packages needed to run our code. The list of the
required packages was the good old requirements.txt that we kept adding to
as we started using a new package. Sometimes, one of us got lazy and we
just added a package name (e.g., torch) without specifying which version
23
of the package it was (e.g., torch==1.10.0+cpu). Occasionally, a new
pull request would run well on my computer but not another coworker’s
computer, and we usually quickly figured out that it was because we used
different versions of the same package. We resolved to always specify the
package name together with the package version when adding a new
package to the requirements.txt, and that removed a lot of unnecessary
headaches.
One day, we ran into this weird bug that only happened during some runs
and not others. I asked my coworker to look into it, but he wasn’t able to
reproduce the bug. I told him that the bug only happened some of the time,
so he might have to run the code around 20 times just to be sure. He ran the
code 20 times and still found nothing. We compared our packages and
everything matched. After a few hours of hair-pulling frustration, we
discovered that it was a concurrency issue that is only an issue for Python
version 3.8 or earlier. I had Python 3.8 and my coworker had Python 3.9, so
he didn’t see the bug. We resolved to have everyone on the same Python
version, and that removed some more headaches.
Then one day, my coworker got a new laptop. It was a MacBook with the
then new M1 chip. He tried to follow our setup steps on this new laptop but
ran into difficulty. It was because the M1 chip was new, and some of the
tools we used, including Docker, weren’t working well with M1 chips yet.
After seeing him struggling with setting the environment up for a day, we
decided to move to a cloud dev environment. This means that we still
standardize the virtual environment and tools and packages, but now
everyone uses the virtual environment and tools and packages on the same
type of machine too, provided by a cloud provider.
When using a cloud dev environment, you can use a cloud dev environment
that also comes with a cloud IDE like AWS Cloud9 (which has no built-in
notebooks) and Amazon SageMaker Studio (which comes with hosted
JupyterLab). As of writing this book, AWS SageMaker Studio seems more
widely used than Cloud9. However, most engineers I know who use cloud
IDEs do so by installing IDEs of their choice, like Vim, on their cloud
instances.
A much more popular option is to use a cloud dev environment with a local
IDE. For example, you can use VS Code installed on your computer and
connect the local IDE to the cloud environment using a secure protocol like
Secure Shell (SSH).
24
While it’s generally agreed upon that tools and packages should be
standardized, some companies are hesitant to standardize IDEs. Engineers
can get emotionally attached to IDEs, and some have gone to great length to
defend their IDE of choice, so it’ll be hard forcing everyone to be using
the same IDE. However, over the years, some IDEs have emerged to be the
most popular. Among them, VS Code is a good choice since it allows easy
integration with cloud dev instances.
At our startup, we chose GitHub Codespaces as our cloud dev environment,
but an AWS EC2 or a GCP instance that you can SSH into is also a good
option. Before moving to cloud environments, like many other companies,
we were worried about the cost—what if we forgot to shut down our
instances when not in use and they kept charging us money? However, this
worry has gone away for two reasons. First, tools like GitHub Codespaces
automatically shut down your instance after 30 minutes of inactivity.
Second, some instances are pretty cheap. For example, an AWS instance
with 4 vCPUs and 8 GB of memory costs around $0.1/hour, which comes to
approximately $73/month if you never shut it down. Because engineering
time is expensive, if a cloud dev environment can help you save a few hours
of engineering time a month, it’s worth it for many companies.
Moving from local dev environments to cloud dev environments has many
other benefits. First, it makes IT support so much easier—imagine having to
support 1,000 different local machines instead of having to support only one
type of cloud instance. Second, it’s convenient for remote work—you can
just SSH into your dev environment wherever you go from any computer.
Third, cloud dev environments can help with security. For example, if an
employee’s laptop is stolen, you can just revoke access to cloud instances
from that laptop to prevent the thief from accessing your codebase and
proprietary information. Of course, some companies might not be able to
move to cloud dev environments also because of security concerns. For
example, they aren’t allowed to have their code or data on the cloud.
The fourth benefit, which I would argue is the biggest benefit for companies
that do production on the cloud, is that having your dev environment on the
cloud reduces the gap between the dev environment and the production
environment. If your production environment is in the cloud, bringing your
dev environment to the cloud is only natural.
Occasionally, a company has to move their dev environments to the cloud
not only because of the benefits, but also out of necessity. For the use cases
where data can’t be downloaded or stored on a local machine, the only way
to access it is via a notebook in the cloud (SageMaker Studio) that can read
the data from S3, provided it has the right permissions.
Of course, cloud dev environments might not work for every company due
to cost, security, or other concerns. Setting up cloud dev environments also
requires some initial investments, and you might need to educate your data
scientists on cloud hygiene, including establishing secure connections to the
cloud, security compliance, or avoiding wasteful cloud usage. However,
standardization of dev environments might make your data scientists’ lives
easier and save you money in the long run.
From Dev to Prod: Containers
During development, you might usually work with a fixed number of
machines or instances (usually one) because your workloads don’t fluctuate
a lot—your model doesn’t suddenly change from serving only 1,000
requests an hour to 1 million requests an hour.
A production service, on the other hand, might be spread out on multiple
instances. The number of instances changes from time to time depending on
the incoming workloads, which can be unpredictable at times. For example,
a celebrity tweets about your fledgling app and suddenly your traffic spikes
10x. You will have to turn on new instances as needed, and these instances
will need to be set up with required tools and packages to execute your
workloads.
Previously, you’d have to spin up and shut down instances yourself, but
most public cloud providers have taken care of the autoscaling part.
However, you still have to worry about setting up new instances.
When you consistently work with the same instance, you can install
dependencies once and use them whenever you use this instance. In
production, if you dynamically allocate instances as needed, your
environment is inherently stateless. When a new instance is allocated for
your workload, you’ll need to install dependencies using a list of predefined
instructions.
A question arises: how do you recreate an environment on any new
instance? Container technology—of which Docker is the most popular—is
designed to answer this question. With Docker, you create a Dockerfile with
step-by-step instructions on how to recreate an environment in which your
model can run: install this package, download this pretrained model, set
environment variables, navigate into a folder, etc. These instructions allow
hardware anywhere to run your code.
Two key concepts in Docker are image and container. Running all the
instructions in a Dockerfile gives you a Docker image. If you run this
Docker image, you get back a Docker container. You can think of a
Dockerfile as the recipe to construct a mold, which is a Docker image.
From this mold, you can create multiple running instances; each is a Docker
container.
You can build a Docker image either from scratch or from another Docker
image. For example, NVIDIA might provide a Docker image that contains
TensorFlow and all necessary libraries to optimize TensorFlow for GPUs. If
you want to build an application that runs TensorFlow on GPUs, it’s not a
bad idea to use this Docker image as your base and install dependencies
specific to your application on top of this base image.
A container registry is where you can share a Docker image or find an
image created by other people to be shared publicly or only with people
inside their organizations. Common container registries include Docker
Hub and AWS ECR (Elastic Container Registry).
Here’s an example of a simple Dockerfile that runs the following
instructions. The example is to show how Dockerfiles work in general, and
might not be executable.
Download the latest PyTorch base image.
Clone NVIDIA’s apex repository on GitHub, navigate to the newly
created apex folder, and install apex.
Set fancy-nlp-project to be the working directory.
Clone Hugging Face’s transformers repository on GitHub, navigate to
the newly created transformers folder, and install transformers.
#Dockerfile 
FROM pytorch/pytorch:latest 
RUN git clone https://github.com/NVIDIA/apex 
RUN cd apex && \ 
    python3 setup.py install && \ 
    pip install -v --no-cache-dir --global-option="--cpp_ext" -
global-option="--cuda_ext" ./ 
WORKDIR /fancy-nlp-project 
RUN git clone https://github.com/huggingface/transformers.git && 
\ 
    cd transformers && \ 
    python3 -m pip install --no-cache-dir.
If your application does anything interesting, you will probably need more
than one container. Consider the case where your project consists of the
featurizing code that is fast to run but requires a lot of memory, and the
model training code that is slow to run but requires less memory. If you run
both parts of the code on the same GPU instances, you’ll need GPU
instances with high memory, which can be very expensive. Instead, you can
run your featurizing code on CPU instances and the model training code on
GPU instances. This means you’ll need one container for featurizing and
another container for training.
Different containers might also be necessary when different steps in your
pipeline have conflicting dependencies, such as your featurizer code
requires NumPy 0.8 but your model requires NumPy 1.0.
If you have 100 microservices and each microservice requires its own
container, you might have 100 containers running at the same time.
Manually building, running, allocating resources for, and stopping 100
containers might be a painful chore. A tool to help you manage multiple
containers is called container orchestration. Docker Compose is a
lightweight container orchestrator that can manage containers on a single
host.
However, each of your containers might run on its own host, and this is
where Docker Compose is at its limits. Kubernetes (K8s) is a tool for
exactly that. K8s creates a network for containers to communicate and share
resources. It can help you spin up containers on more instances when you
need more compute/memory as well as shutting down containers when you
no longer need them, and it helps maintain high availability for your
system.
K8s was one of the fastest-growing technologies in the 2010s. Since its
inception in 2014, it’s become ubiquitous in production systems today.
Jeremy Jordan has a great introduction to K8s for readers interested in
learning more. However, K8s is not the most data-scientist-friendly tool,
and there have been many discussions on how to move data science
workloads away from it. We’ll go more into K8s in the “Resource
Management” section