Storage and Compute
8
ML systems work with a lot of data, and this data needs to be stored
somewhere. The storage layer is where data is collected and stored. At its
simplest form, the storage layer can be a hard drive disk (HDD) or a solid
state disk (SSD). The storage layer can be in one place, e.g., you might have
all your data in Amazon S3 or in Snowflake, or spread out over multiple
locations. Your storage layer can be on-prem in a private data center or on
the cloud. In the past, companies might have tried to manage their own
storage layer. However, in the last decade, the storage layer has been mostly
commoditized and moved to the cloud. Data storage has become so cheap
that most companies just store all the data they have without the cost.
9
We’ve covered the data layer intensively in Chapter 3, so in this chapter,
we’ll focus on the compute layer.
The compute layer refers to all the compute resources a company has access
to and the mechanism to determine how these resources can be used. The
amount of compute resources available determines the scalability of your
workloads. You can think of the compute layer as the engine to execute
your jobs. At its simplest form, the compute layer can just be a single CPU
core or a GPU core that does all your computation. Its most common form
is cloud compute managed by a cloud provider such as AWS Elastic
Compute Cloud (EC2) or GCP.
The compute layer can usually be sliced into smaller compute units to be
used concurrently. For example, a CPU core might support two concurrent
threads; each thread is used as a compute unit to execute its own job. Or
multiple CPU cores might be joined together to form a larger compute unit
to execute a larger job. A compute unit can be created for a specific short
lived job such as an AWS Step Function or a GCP Cloud Run—the unit will
be eliminated after the job finishes. A compute unit can also be created to
be more “permanent,” aka without being tied to a job, like a virtual
machine. A more permanent compute unit is sometimes called an
“instance.”
However, the compute layer doesn’t always use threads or cores as compute
units. There are compute layers that abstract away the notions of cores and
use other units of computation. For example, computation engines like
Spark and Ray use “job” as their unit, and Kubernetes uses “pod,” a
wrapper around containers, as its smallest deployable unit. While you can
have multiple containers in a pod, you can’t independently start or stop
different containers in the same pod.
To execute a job, you first need to load the required data into your compute
unit’s memory, then execute the required operations—addition,
multiplication, division, convolution, etc.—on that data. For example, to
add two arrays, you will first need to load these two arrays into memory,
and then perform addition on the two arrays. If the compute unit doesn’t
have enough memory to load these two arrays, the operation will be
impossible without an algorithm to handle out-of-memory computation.
Therefore, a compute unit is mainly characterized by two metrics: how
much memory it has and how fast it runs an operation.
10
The memory metric can be specified using units like GB, and it’s generally
straightforward to evaluate: a compute unit with 8 GB of memory can
handle more data in memory than a compute unit with only 2 GB, and it is
generally more expensive. Some companies care not only how much
memory a compute unit has but also how fast it is to load data in and out of
memory, so some cloud providers advertise their instances as having “high
bandwidth memory” or specify their instances’ I/O bandwidth.
The operation speed is more contentious. The most common metric is
FLOPS—floating point operations per second. As the name suggests, this
metric denotes the number of float point operations a compute unit can run
per second. You might see a hardware vendor advertising that their GPUs or
TPUs or IPUs (intelligence processing units) have teraFLOPS (one trillion
FLOPS) or another massive number of FLOPS.
11
However, this metric is contentious because, first, companies that measure
this metric might have different ideas on what is counted as an operation.
For example, if a machine fuses two operations into one and executes this
fused operation, does this count as one operation or two? Second, just
because a compute unit is capable of doing a trillion FLOPS doesn’t mean
you’ll be able to execute your job at the speed of a trillion FLOPS. The
ratio of the number of FLOPS a job can run to the number of FLOPs a
compute unit is capable of handling is called utilization. If an instance is
capable of doing a million FLOPs and your job runs with 0.3 million
FLOPS, that’s a 30% utilization rate. Of course, you’d want to have your
utilization rate as high as possible. However, it’s near impossible to achieve
100% utilization rate. Depending on the hardware backend and the
application, the utilization rate of 50% might be considered good or bad.
Utilization also depends on how fast you can load data into memory to
perform the next operations—hence the importance of I/O bandwidth.
12
When evaluating a new compute unit, it’s important to evaluate how long it
will take this compute unit to do common workloads. For example, MLPerf
is a popular benchmark for hardware vendors to measure their hardware
performance by showing how long it will take their hardware to train a
ResNet-50 model on the ImageNet dataset or use a BERT-large model to
generate predictions for the SQuAD dataset.
Because thinking about FLOPS is not very useful, to make things easier,
when evaluating compute performance, many people just look into the
number of cores a compute unit has. So you might use an instance with 4
CPU cores and 8 GB of memory. Keep in mind that AWS uses the concept
of vCPU, which stands for virtual CPU and which, for practical purposes,
can be thought of as half a physical core. You can see the number of cores
and memory offered by some AWS EC2 and GCP instances in Figure 10-3.
13
Figure 10-3. Examples of GPU and TPU instances available on AWS and GCP as of February 2022.
Screenshotted from AWS and GCP websites.
Public Cloud Versus Private Data Centers
Like data storage, the compute layer is largely commoditized. This means
that instead of setting up their own data centers for storage and compute,
companies can pay cloud providers like AWS and Azure for the exact
amount of compute they use. Cloud compute makes it extremely easy for
companies to start building without having to worry about the compute
layer. It’s especially appealing to companies that have variable-sized
workloads. Imagine if your workloads need 1,000 CPU cores one day of the
year and only 10 CPU cores the rest of the year. If you build your own data
centers, you’ll need to pay for 1,000 CPU cores up front. With cloud
compute, you only need to pay for 1,000 CPU cores one day of the year and
10 CPU cores the rest of the year. It’s convenient to be able to just add more
compute or shut down instances as needed—most cloud providers even do
that automatically for you—reducing engineering operational overhead.
This is especially useful in ML as data science workloads are bursty. Data
scientists tend to run experiments a lot for a few weeks during development,
which requires a surge of compute power. Later on, during production, the
workload is more consistent.
14
15
Keep in mind that cloud compute is elastic but not magical. It doesn’t
actually have infinite compute. Most cloud providers offer limits on the
compute resources you can use at a time. Some, but not all, of these limits
can be raised through petitions. For example, as of writing this book, AWS
EC2’s largest instance is X1e with 128 vCPUs and almost 4 TB of
memory. Having a lot of compute resources doesn’t mean that it’s always
easy to use them, especially if you have to work with spot instances to save
cost.
Due to the cloud’s elasticity and ease of use, more and more companies are
choosing to pay for the cloud over building and maintaining their own
storage and compute layer. Synergy Research Group’s research shows that
in 2020, “enterprise spending on cloud infrastructure services [grew] by
35% to reach almost $130 billion” while “enterprise spending on data
[centers] dropped by 6% to under $90 billion,” as shown in Figure 10-4.
16
Figure 10-4. In 2020, enterprise spending on cloud infrastructure services grew by 35% while
spending on data centers dropped by 6%
While leveraging the cloud tends to give companies higher returns than
building their own storage and compute layers early on, however, this
becomes less defensible as a company grows. Based on disclosed cloud
infrastructure spending by public software companies, the venture capital
firm a16z shows that cloud spending accounts for approximately 50% cost
of revenue of these companies.
17
The high cost of the cloud has prompted companies to start moving their
workloads back to their own data centers, a process called “cloud
repatriation.” Dropbox’s S-1 filing in 2018 shows that the company was
able to save $75M over the two years prior to IPO due to their infrastructure
optimization overhaul—a large chunk of it consisted of moving their
workloads from public cloud to their own data centers. Is the high cost of
cloud unique to Dropbox because Dropbox is in the data storage business?
Not quite. In the same analysis mentioned above, a16z estimated that
“across 50 of the top public software companies currently utilizing cloud
infrastructure, an estimated $100B of market value is being lost among
18
them due to cloud impact on margins—relative to running the infrastructure
themselves.”
While getting started with the cloud is easy, moving away from the cloud is
hard. Cloud repatriation requires nontrivial up-front investment in both
commodities and engineering effort. More and more companies are
following a hybrid approach: keeping most of their workloads on the cloud
but slowly increasing their data centers investment.
ON MULTICLOUD STRATEGY
19
20
Another way for companies to reduce their dependence on any single cloud provider is
to follow a multicloud strategy: spreading their workloads on multiple cloud
providers. This allows companies to architect their systems so that they can be
compatible with multiple clouds, enabling them to leverage the best and most cost
effective technologies available instead of being stuck with the services provided by a
single cloud provider, a situation known as vendor lock-in. A 2019 study by Gartner
shows that 81% of organizations are working with two or more public cloud
providers. A common pattern that I’ve seen for ML workloads is to do training on
GCP or Azure, and deployment on AWS.
The multicloud strategy doesn’t usually happen by choice. As Josh Wills, one of our
early reviewers, put it: “Nobody in their right mind intends to use multicloud.” It’s
incredibly hard to move data and orchestrate workloads across clouds.
Often, multicloud just happens because different parts of the organization operate
independently, and each part makes their own cloud decision. It can also happen
following an acquisition—the acquired team is already on a cloud different from the
host organization, and migrating hasn’t happened yet.
In my work, I’ve seen multicloud happen due to strategic investments. Microsoft and
Google are big investors in the startup ecosystem, and several companies that I work
with that were previously on AWS have moved to Azure/GCP after Microsoft/Google
invested in them